# optimade-launch
## How to use optimade-launch

`optimade-launch` is the cli tool to start a optimade server from `JSONL` database easily.

To use OPTIMADE launch you will have to

1. [Install Docker on your workstation or laptop.](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
2. Install OPTIMADE launch with [pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/installation/) (**recommended**):

   ```console
   pipx install optimade-launch
   ```

   _Or directly with pip (`pip install optimade-launch`)._

3. creating a profile and attach a database from inject data from JSONL file

   ```console
   optimade-launch profile create --profile-name test --jsonl /path/to/your/jsonl/file
   ```

4. Start OPTIMADE server of testing data with

    ```console
    optimade-launch start
    ```
5. Follow the instructions on screen to open OPTIMADE API in the browser.

See `optimade-launch --help` for detailed help.

### Instance Management

You can inspect the status of all configured AiiDAlab profiles with:

```console
optimade-launch status
```

### Profile Management

The tool allows to manage multiple profiles, e.g., with different home directories or ports.
See `optimade-launch profile --help` for more information.

### Database Management

See `optimade-launch database --help` for more information.

Can used to check the database connection, or to inject data from a JSONL file.
Can used to clean up the database.

### Container Management

See `optimade-launch container --help` for more information.

Can be used to check the status of the container, or to stop and remove the container.

### Server Management

We provide shortcuts to manage both the container and the database at once.

```console
optimade-launch server start -p profile_name
```

```console
optimade-launch server stop --clean-database -p profile_name
```

See `optimade-launch server --help` for more information.

### Used in the Materials Cloud Archive

The Materials Cloud Archive optimade integration uses `optimade-launch` to start the OPTIMADE server.

The JSONL file is generated by scanning the archive entries and extracting the relevant information. 
JSONL files are stored in the ``/var/lib/optimade-archive`` directory.

Once a new JSONL file is found in the directory, the server is started with the new data.

In Materials Cloud archive integration, we use socket to communicate between the optimade container and the host machine.
The socket is created and stored in the ``/var/lib/optimade-sockets`` directory.

The optimade-launch profile can be created from yml file with setting the customized parameters for each archive entry.

```yml
name: <parsed_doi>
socket:
   - /host/path.sock:/container/path.sock
   - /var/lib/optimade-sockets/<parsed_doi>.sock:/tmp/<parsed_doi>.sock
jsonl:
   - /var/lib/optimade-archive/<parsed_doi>.jsonl
mongo_uri: mongodb://localhost:27017
db_name: <parsed_doi>
```

```console
optimade-launch profile create --config /path/to/your/yml/file
```

```console
optimade-launch server start -p <parsed_doi>
```

The profiles configuration file location can be displayed with:

```console
optimade-launch profile show-config-location
```

## Relevant links

- [Roadmap and meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cIpwuX6Ty5d3ZHKYWktQaBBQcI9fYmgG_hsD1P1UpO4/edit)
- [OPTIMADE serialization format notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vf8_qxSRP5lCSb0P3M9gTr6nqkERxgOoSDno6YLcCjo/edit)
- [Flow diagram](https://excalidraw.com/#json=MBNl66sARCQekVrKZXDg8,K35f5FwmiS46vlsYGMJdrw)